we begin in central Gaza where an
Israeli air strike in De albala has
killed at least several Aid workers most
of them foreign Nationals while they
were members of world Central Kitchen a
group that's coordinating Aid deliveries
transported by ship from Cyprus citizens
of Australia the UK and Poland were
among the dead Australia's prime
minister says he expects full
accountability while the US was called
for Swift investigation the Israeli Army
says it's reviewing the incident at the
highest
levels Australia expects full
accountability for the deaths of Aid
workers uh which is completely
unacceptable uh Aid workers and those
doing humanitarian work and indeed all
innocent civilians need to be provided
with protection Australia has had a very
clear position of supporting a
sustainable ceasefire of calling for it
for some period of time uh we certainly
have already contacted uh the Israeli
government directly uh we are contacting
the Israeli Ambassador uh to uh ask uh
for uh accountability here uh the truth
is that that this is beyond uh Beyond
any reasonable circumstances someone
going about providing Aid and
humanitarian assist assistant uh should
lose their
life and the world Central Kitchen has
responded to that attack saying we are
aware of reports that members of the
team have been killed in an IDF attack
while working to support our
humanitarian food delivery efforts in
Gaza this is a tragedy humanitarian Aid
workers and civilians should never be a
Target
ever earlier we spoke to Al jazer HRI
who was at the al- AXA hospital where
victims were taken
she met the world Central Kitchen staff
just hours before the attack on
Monday we know that there are five a
workers working with the world Central
Kitchen a Palestinian a Polish British
and Australian and the fourth uh uh body
is
unrecognizable because it was severely
uh injured but according to the world
Central Kitchen employees that we met in
alaka hospital they told us that he is
an
international uh uh worker also H they
were on their way back from uh the eight
uh Convoy uh the eight ships that um uh
reach the Gaza Strip from Cypress uh
earlier today and they were on their way
back to the to their guest house in ra
and they were targeted uh with their
armored vehicles uh near uh balah on AR
Rashid Street the main uh street that we
mobilized through from uh the North to
the southern area of the G strip I
remember when I talked to one of the aid
workers today I was asking them what
were they waiting for because they were
near Gazza in the southern site and they
said they were waiting for the green
light to enter um to the Northern Area
and to cross W gizza and uh uh to go to
the port that they built so there's
something uh un understandable we don't
know how uh they were targeted we know
that they have been all of the
international uh organizations have been
uh closely um uh coordinating with the
Israeli forces but this um incident is
horrifying and there are hundreds of
other Aid Workers International Aid
workers currently working with providing
aid for Palestinians providing on
helping um Palestinians uh like
providing them with Aid with protection
and their displacement and now the
question is what is going to happen with
the other Foreigner and international
Aid workers in the
godship let's bring in Ben sa now he's a
un special rapporter on human rights and
counterterrorism he joins us live from
Sydney welcome to the program what do
you make of this incident that has
killed at least seven Aid workers in
including a Palestinian and
international Aid workers
too it's a human tragedy but of course
it could well also be a violation of
international humanitarian law under
which Israel has a duty not to
deliberately Target uh humanitarian
relief workers or their convoys or their
or their relief uh Consignments uh it
also has a wider duty to ensure the
safety of humanitarian workers in a
conflict Zone to ensure their freedom of
movement uh and to coordinate with them
so that these kinds of tragedies uh
never happen you mention international
law there I mean where would this foot
in in terms of what could be considered
to be a war
crime well under International
humanitarian law if there's a deliberate
targeting of any civilian including
humanitarian relief workers that's a war
crime uh if there's a a targeting of a a
military objective which causes uh
excessive civilian casualties uh in the
area that would be a war crime or if
it's an indiscriminate attack uh so an
attack was launched uh with a kind of
recklessness or carelessness as to
whether military and surrounding
civilians would be uh would be harmed uh
obviously given the humanitarian crisis
in Gaza uh the the free passage of
humanitarian relief is absolutely
essential and just like last week the
international court of justice ordered
Israel to open more land Crossings
precisely because over a million
Palestinians in Gaza are currently
facing catastrophic levels of hunger
according to the United Nations uh the
Israel has also been uh previously uh
trying to shut down unoa one of the
largest humanitarian actors in Gaza uh
numerous unoa employees have been killed
it's not just foreigners of course
because most of the humanitarian relief
is provided by Palestinians themselves
who live in Gaza so this is a an acute
problem which has been ongoing for the
past five or six months and a full
investigation and accountability is
warranted as you say not just foreigners
I mean not withstanding the 30 more than
32,000 Palestinians killed in all of
this many foreign Nationals were killed
in this particular attack does that put
more pressure on countries to for
example perhaps reconsider arms deals to
Israel
well the death of any civilian in this
conflict when it is unlawful is a
violation of international law and
potentially a war crime and we should
care equally about all of those lives uh
now unfortunately it is a a fact of life
that uh some countries and some medeia
organizations will only be interested or
will be more interested in the story if
it involves Nationals from their own
countries uh we should nonetheless let's
use that as an opportunity to bring
greater pressure to bear on those
foreign governments who are still
cooperating with Israel uh in its
violations of international law in Gaza
we know that the United States and
Germany for example are the two largest
arms exporters to Israel continuing to
export weapons even though under
International humanitarian law uh doing
so is illegal where there is a clear
risk that those weapons would be used uh
in violations of international
humanitarian law B Israel uh itself uh
that risk is is very clear a Dutch
appeals court uh not so long ago found
that there was a clear risk of Dutch
arms exports being used in Israeli
violations in Gaza uh for the same
reason under the Geneva conventions
under the genocide convention uh there's
a duty to uh halt These Arms exports
immediately also a duty to Halt the
sharing of military intelligence which
some states like the US and the UK are
still providing to Israel without
sufficient guarantees or safeguards that
that information will not be used in the
commission of violations of
international law in Gaza so how does a
country like Australia for example react
to this I mean it stance on Israel's
action seems to have evolved over the
past few
months so the Australian prime minister
of course has called Already upon Israel
for a full investig ation of this this
incident and to hold any perpetrators
accountable that of course is the is is
absolutely the right message to send the
problem of course is that Israel is
notorious for not independently and
impartially investigating violations by
its own forces and even more notorious
for almost never holding accountable any
of its Personnel who have been credibly
alleged to have committed war crimes or
other serious violations of
international law this is a kind of
impunity which has been going on for
many many decades it's not just the
current conflict it extends to previous
conflicts uh whether in Gaza or Lebanon
or or or in the West Bank uh it it
extends to strikes in neighboring
territories like Syria of the kind we've
seen again this week without any clear
justification under international law so
I think it is something of a vain hope
to expect Israel uh to seriously and
credibly investigate its own people and
hold them accountable this is exactly
why the international criminal court has
been forced to investigate Israel
because the international criminal court
will only get involved and will only
investigate a situation in a country if
that country's own authorities have
failed to genuinely investigate and hold
accountable their own people B we leave
it there we very much appreciate your
time thank thank
you thank you